bpo-39287: Doc: Add UTF-8 mode section in using/windows. (#17935)
python/cpython: Doc/using/windows.rst

    C:\WINDOWS\system32;C:\WINDOWS;C:\Program Files\Python 3.9

.. _win-utf8-mode:

Using UTF-8 mode
================

.. versionadded:: 3.7

> Windows doesn't use UTF-8 for the system encoding (the ANSI Code Page).

Reviewer: Windows 10 supports setting the system locale's ANSI and OEM codepages to UTF-8 (65001), but it's not enabled by default.

There are still problems to be resolved with using UTF-8 at the system level. In particular, the console host (conhost.exe) doesn't support using UTF-8 as the input codepage for use with `ReadFile` and `ReadConsoleA`. It encodes the UTF-16 input buffer with an internal `WideCharToMultiByte` call that assumes one byte per encoded character (at least in a Western locale, for which a single-byte encoding is assumed). This fails for non-ASCII characters, which in turn end up as null bytes in the result of a `ReadFile` or `ReadConsoleA` call. Python is immune to this problem for the most part. The I/O stack detects a console file and uses wide-character `ReadConsoleW` instead, via `io._WindowsConsoleIO`. The problem affects low-level `os.write` and `os.read`, however, because they're not integrated with `_WindowsConsoleIO`.

Author: > Windows 10 supports setting the system locale's ANSI and OEM codepages to UTF-8 (65001), but it's not enabled by default.

It is still beta and breaks many applications.  I don't think we should refer it here until it becomes non-beta.

> There are still problems to be resolved with using UTF-8 at the system level. In particular, the console host (conhost.exe) doesn't support using UTF-8 as the input codepage for use with ReadFile and ReadConsoleA. It encodes the UTF-16 input buffer with an internal WideCharToMultiByte call that assumes one byte per encoded character (at least in a Western locale, for which a single-byte encoding is assumed). This fails for non-ASCII characters, which in turn end up as null bytes in the result of a ReadFile or ReadConsoleA call. Python is immune to this problem for the most part. The I/O stack detects a console file and uses wide-character ReadConsoleW instead, via io._WindowsConsoleIO. 

Yes, that's why I don't mention about stdio encoding here.

> The problem affects low-level `os.write` and `os.read`, however, because they're not integrated with `_WindowsConsoleIO`.

`os.write` and `os.read` uses bytes, not unicode.  So UTF-mode doesn't affect to it.

Reviewer: > `os.write` and `os.read` uses bytes, not unicode. So UTF-mode doesn't affect to it.

What I meant was the problem I discussed above with calling `ReadFile` (e.g. via `os.read` -> `read` -> `ReadFile`) on a console input file when the input codepage is set to UTF-8. The latter could be set as the default from changing the system OEM codepage to UTF-8, or by setting the "CodePage" value in a subkey of "HKCU\Console" (subkey named for the initial window title), or by manually calling `SetConsoleCP(65001)`, such as via `chcp.com 65001`. As I discussed above, in this case input read from the console is limited to 7-bit ASCII, and all ordinals above 127 are replaced by null bytes.

Setting the output codepage to UTF-8 (e.g. `SetConsoleOutputCP(65001)`) works reasonably well in Windows 8+, but it still has a problem with C buffered `FILE` streams. The console doesn't expect multibyte data to span multiple writes (with the exception of legacy DBCS codepages), so a code sequence that gets split across two writes becomes two replacement characters (U+FFFD) in the screen buffer. Still, this is a huge improvement over Windows 7 and older, which mistakenly returns the number of UTF-16 code points written (1-2) instead of the number of UTF-8 bytes (1-4). That confuses buffered writers, and leads to multiple writes of garbage on the screen. They fixed that years ago when Windows 8 switched to using the ConDrv device for console I/O instead of an LPC port.

Author: How does it affect to the UTF-8 mode?

Reviewer: In the first post I said it's also possible to enable UTF-8 at the system level, which concerns the direction I see Windows headed toward in the relatively near future (4-6 years -- a couple years after Windows 8.1 is retired). Then in the following paragraph I provided an example of the current problems with it. My followup was just to clarify the relevance of the example regarding `os.read` and `os.write`, in case there was some misunderstanding. It wasn't specifically about UTF-8 mode.

Back on topic, if legacy console I/O is enabled via `PYTHONLEGACYWINDOWSSTDIO`, currently UTF-8 mode leads to mojibake. It disregards the console codepage to use UTF-8. I think this is nearly right, but it should force using `_WindowsConsoleIO` instead of nonsensically using UTF-8 with console files when the console codepage is not UTF-8. 

Also -- not directly related -- but legacy stdio mode is broken in general because the new configuration code doesn't use the result from `_Py_device_encoding` like it's supposed to, but instead always uses the preferred encoding (UTF-8 or ANSI). If UTF-8 mode is not enabled, it should not force console files to use ANSI. All console files in that case (not just fds 0-2) should use the console codepage. So the configuration code needs to be fixed, and we also need to fix `_Py_device_encoding` / `os.device_encoding`, which were always broken in Windows.

    C:\WINDOWS\system32;C:\WINDOWS;C:\Program Files\Python 3.9

.. _win-utf8-mode:

Using UTF-8 mode
================

.. versionadded:: 3.7

Windows doesn't use UTF-8 for the system encoding (the ANSI Code Page).
And Python uses the system encoding for the default encoding of text files.

It may cause trouble because UTF-8 is very widely used on the internet
and most Unix systems, including WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux).

You can use the UTF-8 mode to change the default text encoding to UTF-8.
You can enable the UTF-8 mode via ``-X utf8`` command option, or
``PYTHONUTF8=1`` environement variable.  See :envvar:`PYTHONUTF8` for
the UTF-8 mode, and :ref:`setting-envvars` for how to modify
environment variables.

When UTF-8 mode is enabled:

* :func:`locale.getpreferredencoding` returns ``'UTF-8'`` instead of
  the legacy system encoding.  This function is used for the default
  text encoding in many places, including :func:`open`, :class:`Popen`,
  :meth:`Path.read_text`, etc.
* :data:`sys.stdin`, :data:`sys.stdout`, and :data:`sys.stderr`
  all use UTF-8 as their text encoding.

.. note::
   Even when the UTF-8 mode is disabled, Python uses UTF-8 on Windows for:

>    * :data:`sys.stdin`, :data:`sys.stdout`, and :data:`sys.stderr`

Reviewer: In general, it's any console file -- whether opening by fd or name. Even if you open something like "C:\\Temp\\con.txt", we resolve this to the actual "\\\\.\\con" path and use `_WindowsConsoleIO` instead of `FileIO`.

Author: fixed.

     when they are console (see :pep:`528` for detail).
   * The filesystem encoding (see :pep:`529` for detail).

You can use the "mbcs" codec for the system encoding in UTF-8 mode.

And you can use the legacy encoding for filesystem encoding via
:func:`sys._enablelegacywindowsfsencoding` or

> :envvar:`PYTHONLEGACYWINDOWSFSENCODING` in UTF-8 mode too.

Reviewer: I still wish it was decided for UTF-8 mode to take precedence over `PYTHONLEGACYWINDOWSFSENCODING` (but not `sys._enablelegacywindowsfsencoding`). The legacy filesystem encoding configuration modifies the default behavior, but UTF-8 mode explicitly overrides default behavior. For example, if we had UTF-8 mode in Python 3.5, before the default filesystem encoding changed to UTF-8 in Windows, I think it would have been justified for UTF-8 mode to override the default filesystem encoding and bypass the Windows MBS API (e.g. `open`, `CreateFileA`) to essentially work the way the UTF-8 filesystem encoding works now, i.e. manually decode and call the WCS API function. Whether someone would have been ambitious enough to do that before Steve Dower got around to it in 3.6 is another matter (probably no).

Author: I want to backport this pull request to Python 3.7 and 3.8.
So I am documenting the current behavior.

Please discuss about changing behavior in python-dev or disuss.python.org.

Author: I removed this paragraph because most users don't care about legacy fs encoding.

    C:\WINDOWS\system32;C:\WINDOWS;C:\Program Files\Python 3.9

.. _win-utf8-mode:

UTF-8 mode
==========

.. versionadded:: 3.7

Windows still uses legacy encodings for the system encoding (the ANSI Code
Page).  Python uses it for the default encoding of text files (e.g.
:func:`locale.getpreferredencoding`).

> It may cause trouble because the UTF-8 is widely used on the internet

Reviewer: It would read better as "This may" instead of "It may". Using "this" is more clearly referring to the previous statement.

> It may cause trouble because the UTF-8 is widely used on the internet

Reviewer 2: In addition to Eryk's recommendation, I'd also advise using "This may cause issues" instead of "This may cause trouble", and removing the "the" before UTF-8:

```suggestion
This may cause issues because UTF-8 is widely used on the internet
```

and most Unix systems, including WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux).

> You can use the UTF-8 mode to change the default text encoding to UTF-8.

Reviewer: It should just be "UTF-8 mode", not "the UTF-8 mode".

> You can use the UTF-8 mode to change the default text encoding to UTF-8.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use UTF-8 mode to change the default text encoding to UTF-8.
```

> You can enable the UTF-8 mode via ``-X utf8`` command option, or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can enable UTF-8 mode via the ``-X utf8`` command line option, or
```

> ``PYTHONUTF8=1`` environment variable.  See :envvar:`PYTHONUTF8` for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the ``PYTHONUTF8=1`` environment variable.  See :envvar:`PYTHONUTF8` for
```

> the UTF-8 mode, and :ref:`setting-envvars` for how to modify

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
enabling UTF-8 mode, and :ref:`setting-envvars` for how to modify
```

environment variables.

When UTF-8 mode is enabled:

* :func:`locale.getpreferredencoding` returns ``'UTF-8'`` instead of
  the legacy system encoding.  This function is used for the default
  text encoding in many places, including :func:`open`, :class:`Popen`,
  :meth:`Path.read_text`, etc.
* :data:`sys.stdin`, :data:`sys.stdout`, and :data:`sys.stderr`
  all use UTF-8 as their text encoding.

> * You can still use the legacy encoding via the "mbcs" codec.

Reviewer: Perhaps to be clear, call this the "system codepage" instead of "legacy encoding". If the system codepage is set to UTF-8, then the MBS API is not using a legacy encoding from the pre-Unicode era.

Note that adding ``PYTHONUTF8=1`` to the default environment variables
will affect all Python 3.7+ applications on your system.

> If you have any Python 3.7+ application which relies on the legacy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have any Python 3.7+ applications which rely on the legacy
```

system encoding, it is recommended to set the environment variable

> temporarily or use the ``-X utf8`` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
temporarily or use the ``-X utf8`` command line option.
```
This suggestion is more subjective, but I think it's helpful to be more specific about the option.

.. note::

>    Even when the UTF-8 mode is disabled, Python uses UTF-8 by default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Even when UTF-8 mode is disabled, Python uses UTF-8 by default
```

   on Windows for:

>    * Console I/O including standard I/O (see :pep:`528` for detail).

Reviewer: It should be "details", not "detail".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Console I/O including standard I/O (see :pep:`528` for details).
```

Using either "details" or "more details" is okay in this case.

>    * The filesystem encoding (see :pep:`529` for detail).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * The filesystem encoding (see :pep:`529` for details).
```
